# Outline
The _overall objective_ of the work is to uncover the temporal structure of the extendec catalog of single nucleotide changes distinguishing modern humans from archaic hominins of Kuhlwilm and Boeckx 2019, exploiting the opportunities afforded by the new GEVA tool. The GEVA tool essentially assigns dates to varianta, and only considers _modern variants_. 

The first datapoint of this study is a contrast between all modern-specific (in the sense of not present in archaics) regardless of frequency vs those that are nearly fixed in the sense of Kuhlwilm and Boeckx (i.e., >90%). Mapping capacity of GEVA here is fairly good (close to 80% of all HF variants). The only drawback of the tool is the poor mapping capacity of completely fixed variants. While this would be a problem for previous approaches which focused on completely fixed variants, the extended catalog used here, departing precisely from complete fixation for reasons discussed in the paper, is rich enough to capture important contrasts.

Mapping capacity could have been better if we had not imposed a 2 source filtering. However, the two source filtering has its advantages, as highlighted by the GEVA paper: it "improve[s] the genealogical resolution from a wider distribution of independently sampled genomes". 
Plots assume a generation time of 29 years, as a convention. 

Some lessons we were able to derive from this: confirmation of a special Jebel period, and in general face > brain; main introgression even around 60k, but signs of introgression (in both directions) prior to 100k, some very old modern variants for face as well as some with excess mutations (discrepancies with Khaitovich, but also Dumas), refined nature of BAZ1B (not all targets behave the same way), recent face changes related to SOX9, selected variants tend to be recent (e.g. CADPS2, RUNX2, GLI3), missense variants as recent as regulatory changes, varaints associated with deepest population splits by Schlebusch et al are indeed old (<500k), some cerebellar specific genes  (ZIC4, GRID2, etc indeed cluster <100k as predicted by Gunz, so do variants for DAAM1 associated with precuneus and globularization). A special 300-500k period, which recent archeological work begins to stress (Stringer 2016, trade/tool changes, etc.)


